From Curiosity to Impact
Curious, determined and ambitious, Elijah Kwaku Adutwum Boateng has made it his
mission to utilize computing and intelligent machines to address real-world challenges. From
early collaborations with researchers at Ashesi University and University of Ghana, the
Ashesi Class of 2023 alum has continually drawn on the technical foundation he built at the
university to solve day-to-day challenges that demand both theory and practical insight. His
capstone project on facial recognition systems marked a turning point in his academic
career, demonstrating his ability to turn academic concepts into functional, real-world
solutions. Driven by discomfort, curiosity, and a commitment to meaningful innovation, Elijah
continues to deepen his knowledge in interactive machine intelligence as an Intelligent
Computing masters student at Ashesi University.
Elijah's journey into the world of intelligence computer science (ICS) began after
graduating from Ashesi University in 2023 with a degree in computer science. During his
University trajectory, he was privileged to work at the University of Ghana and Ashesi
University as a research aide, usually being assigned to foundational tasks, including
literature reviews and data interpretation. Post his graduation from Ashesi in 2023, he was
employed by the university as a faculty intern in the provost's office. He did not neglect his
love for the world of machine intelligence, during his employment as a faculty intern, he
worked alongside Dr. Govender on research projects.
According to Elijah, working with the Academic Affairs and Professors, especially, Dr.
Govender taught him how to be patient and meticulous when undertaking research projects,
and not necessarily rush into conclusions. He also learned that, though capstone projects
generally force people into deadlines, it is important to be innovative and circumspect while
allowing room to explore. Now, even under time pressure, Elijah ideates quickly and
frequently, enabling him to see many results from which he identifies the most efficient
approach within a short time.
During this time, he was exposed to a plethora of topics under machine intelligence,
such as how Code can interact with real-world systems and transforming abstract algorithms
into solutions that address concrete challenges. That’s where he realized that sitting in front
of the computer, just typing “one’s” and ” zero’s”, “input” and “print,” would isolate his work
behind screens, hijacking both worldly impact and his ability to engage physically with
communities. Thus, he decided to offer ICS as a concatenation of theoretical foundations,
research experience, and strong applicative orientation.
Early in his academic journey, Elijah was introduced to the world of research as he
worked on research projects with professors from the University of Ghana and Ashesi. He
was tasked with the development of literature reviews, data collection and summarisation
and with the interpretation of basic statistics. In his final year at Ashesi, he found that the
research knowledge he had accumulated from the tertiary institutions had provided him with
the prerequisite knowledge to work independently and efficiently on the research for his
capstone titled “Facial Recognition Using Multiple Constraints with Application to Attendance
Management”.

Taking inspiration from Dr. Lumens’ work on facial recognition, Elijah sought to
enhance the existing model which he observed functioned effectively but in isolation across
different constraints, thus he aimed to integrate these individual strengths into a single, more
efficient model. His research focused on three major components. The first component he
improved was detection, he addressed lighting challenges by improving the system’s ability
to accurately locate faces under varying lighting conditions. Secondly, he addressed feature
extraction by improving the visibility and alignment of key facial landmarks such as the eyes,
nose, and mouth, by utilizing Google’s FaceNet which is a pretrained model used to
generate robust feature embeddings even when parts of the face are partially obscured.
Finally he improved the classification stage in the model through the employment of
distance-based methods and Support Vector Machines (SVMs) to distinguish between
individuals faces with higher precision and accuracy. Although the system did not explicitly
account for rapid, real-time changes in lighting and pose, his final model still achieved an
accuracy of approximately 95–96%.
Building on his capstone research, Elijah is exploring the intersection of vision and
language, working on ‘language-vision models’ which are equipped with vision to both see
and understand. While he acknowledged the existence of GPT-based systems that can
perform similar tasks, he stated that they are often expensive and inaccessible thus
motivating him to develop cheaper, smaller and more efficient models capable of running
locally. He seeks to build a model that can make meaningful contributions to healthcare in
Ghana, referring to his model as a “low-cost, hospital in your pocket” that can listen, see,
and reduce consultation times and provide accurate diagnosis and treatment
recommendations.
Reflecting on his journey so far, Elijah emphasized the importance of patience as a
virtue in research. He learnt the importance of meticulousness and careful observation, from
esteemed professors like Dr. Govender and Dr. Jumens who taught him that thoughtful
iteration and attention to detail often lead to more meaningful and effective solutions.
Although sometimes challenging to practice, the value of patience and meticulousness have
allowed him to iterate frequently, explore multiple outcomes to identify the most efficient
approaches.
Aside from patience, Elijah highlighted that his ‘eureka moments’ mainly arose from
moments of discomfort and frustration. For instance his capstone facial recognition project
was birthed in the middle of the night when his phone could not recognize his face and failed
to unlock. Problems like these piqued his curiosity causing him to ponder until solutions
began to surface. He emphasizes that anyone can identify problems by observing what
doesn’t work, for him, this reflection has become a key source of innovation, with ideas
quickly taking shape in his mind
As a student currently pursuing a master’s degree in ICS, Elijah’s aim now is how to find
missing persons efficiently and how delivery systems could automate connections instead of
requiring calls. He hopes to achieve this by building upon his face recognition project he
worked on as his final year capstone project.

